Local Emissions for Net Zero 
(LENZ) Modelling Suite – Toronto 

Non-technical documentation 

                          For the City of Toronto 

Version 1.0 – August 2023 

Photo by Scott Webb from Pexels 

i 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Acknowledgements 

Land acknowledgement 

The City of Toronto acknowledges that we are on the traditional territory of many nations including the 
Mississaugas of the Credit, the Anishnabeg, the Chippewa, the Haudenosaunee, and the Wendat peoples 
and  is  now  home  to  many  diverse  First  Nations,  Inuit,  and  Métis  peoples.  The  City  of  Toronto  also 
acknowledges that Toronto is covered by Treaty 13 signed with the Mississaugas of the Credit, and the 
Williams Treaties signed with multiple Mississaugas and Chippewa bands. 

General acknowledgement 

The City of Toronto would like to acknowledge the community members and staff from across the city 
that contributed to the development of the Local Emissions for Net Zero (LENZ) Modelling Suite. The City 
of Toronto is grateful to all leaders and community members who have contributed their time to help 
advance the city’s efforts to address climate change. 

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

About the project team 

ESMIA Consultants 

in  3E  (energy-economy-environment) 
ESMIA  provides  expertise 
integrated  system  modelling  for  deriving  and  analyzing  optimal 
economic,  energy  and  climate  strategies.  ESMIA  puts  forward  a 
scientific  approach  guided  by  sophisticated  mathematical  models. 
The  goal  behind  our  implication  is  to  offer  solutions  that  allow 
achieving energy and climate goals without compromising economic 
growth.  For  20  years,  the  ESMIA  consultants  provide  a  full  range  of  services  for  the  development  of 
economy-wide energy system models for high-profile organizations worldwide. They also provide advisory 
services  that  focus on  analyzing  complex  problems  such  as  energy  security,  electrification,  technology 
roadmap  and  energy  transitions.  ESMIA  benefits  from  its  own  integrated  suite  of  models,  including  in 
particular: The North American TIMES Energy Model (NATEM) combined with the North American general 
Equilibrium Model (NAGEM). 

Sustainable Energy Systems Integration and Transition Group (SESIT) 

Integration  and 
The  Sustainable  Energy  Systems 
Transitions  Group 
led  by  Madeleine 
MacPherson  at  the  University  of  Victoria.  The  group 
focuses on energy systems integration – the process of coordinating the operation and planning of our 
energy systems over a variety of spatial-temporal scales and infrastructure systems (transport, buildings, 
electricity,  water).  Their  work  involves  the  development  and  application  of  energy  system  software, 
designed  to  address  research  and  policy  questions  related  to  variable  renewable  energy  integration, 
demand response initiatives, utility-scale and behind-the-meter storage technologies, and electric vehicle 
integration. 

(SESIT) 

is 

We acknowledge data support provided by the Sustainability Solution Group (SSG). 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

City of Toronto – Project team 

  Ezzat Jaroudi  
 
Jessica Murray  
  Marvin Quitoras 
  Sean Severin 

ESMIA Consultants – Consulting team 

  Romain Chaffanjon 
  Elizaveta Kuznetsova 
  Nolwen Stéphan 
  Kathleen Vaillancourt 
  Alison Bailie 
  Mathilde K. Bourque 

SESIT - Support team 

 
Jacob Monroe 
  Madeleine Seatle 
  Madeleine McPherson 
  Ahnaf Ahmed 
  Evan Dungate 

Technical Advisory Group  

We  acknowledge  the  support  provided  by  the  Technical  Advisory  Group  for  the  development  and 
application of LENZ. 

Joerg Wittenbrinck, Ontario Ministry of Energy, Northern Development and Mines 
John Robinson, University of Toronto, Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy 

  Aakash Harpalani, The Atmospheric Fund (TAF), Research and Innovation 
  Alec Warzin, Natural Resources Canada, Renewable and Electrical Energy Division 
  Clayton Barrows, National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
  Daniel Posen, University of Toronto, Department of Civil & Mineral Engineering 
 
 
  Kevin Palmer-Wilson, Environment and Climate Change Canada 
  Ozge Kaplan, EPA's Center for Environmental Measurement and Modeling 
  Peter Massie, Natural Resources Canada, Office of Energy Research and Development 
  Robert Stupka, C40 Cities 
  Taco Niet, Simon Fraser University 

iv 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Table of contents 

_Toc141083055 

How to use this document ? .................................................................................................. 1 

1. 

Introduction to Local Energy for Net Zero ........................................................................ 2 

1.1.  What is the purpose of LENZ? ...................................................................................................  3 

1.2.  What is LENZ made up of? ........................................................................................................  4 

1.3.  What are the key features and limitations of LENZ? ................................................................  9 

2.  How can LENZ be used? ................................................................................................ 12 

2.1.  What types of scenarios can be modelled? ..............................................................................  13 

2.2. 

TEMOA-TO, a long-term planning model .................................................................................. 15 

2.2.1. 

Scope & assumptions .......................................................................................................... 15 

2.2.2. 

Results interpretations ........................................................................................................ 19 

2.3. 

SILVER-TO & the Linking Tool, a short-term planning model .................................................... 20 

2.3.1. 

Scope & assumptions .......................................................................................................... 20 

2.3.2. 

Results interpretations ........................................................................................................ 24 

3.  Typical use cases for LENZ ............................................................................................. 26 

3.1. 

Carbon accountability through carbon budgets .......................................................................  27 

3.2. 

Accelerate significant reduction of natural gas ......................................................................... 28 

3.3. 

Establish building performance targets ....................................................................................  29 

3.4. 

Increase low carbon transportation options ............................................................................. 30 

3.5. 

Increase local renewable energy & storage .............................................................................. 31 

3.6. 

Resilience of electric power supply ........................................................................................... 32 

3.7. 

Energy affordability ................................................................................................................... 33 

3.8. 

Employment .............................................................................................................................. 34 

3.9. 

Social cost of inaction ...............................................................................................................  35 

v 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

List of figures 

Figure 1. Illustration of the components of LENZ ......................................................................................... 5 
Figure 2. Type of scenarios modelled using LENZ ....................................................................................... 13 
Figure 3. Schematic cost-optimality representation of LENZ and TransformTO NZS scenarios ................. 14 
Figure 4. Modelling scope related to GHG emitting sectors ....................................................................... 15 
Figure 5. Steps to build a comprehensive database for TEMOA-TO........................................................... 17 
Figure 6. Results of the NZ40-TTO scenario of the case study from TEMOA-TO ........................................ 19 
Figure 7. The regional transmission system supplying Toronto ................................................................. 21 
Figure 8. Example of load profile break down done by the Linking Tool for a winter day ......................... 23 
Figure 9. How electricity demand profile of the City may be reshaped in the future? .............................. 25 
Figure 10. Cumulated investment costs ..................................................................................................... 27 
Figure 11. Natural consumption in net-zero scenario ................................................................................ 28 
Figure 12. Retrofitting level in existing buildings ........................................................................................ 29 
Figure 13. Car & Light-truck vehicle kilometres travelled ........................................................................... 30 
Figure 14. Capacity deployment for local energy ....................................................................................... 31 
Figure 15. Impact on seasonal peak demand supplied from the electricity grid........................................ 32 
Figure 16. Subsidies to be paid as bill rebates to decrease energy poverty in Toronto ............................. 33 
Figure 17. Net person-year of employment required and the projected annual labour force in Toronto 34 
Figure 18. Cumulative Social cost of carbon ............................................................................................... 35 

List of tables 

Table 1. Difference between simulation and optimization models .............................................................. 9 
Table 2. List of data sources used to build the TEMOA-TO model ............................................................. 18 

vi 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

List of acronyms 

ACRONYM 

DEFINITION 

3E 

CO2 

EV 

GHG 

IESO 

IPCC 

LENZ 

Energy-economy-environment 

Carbon dioxide 

Electric vehicles 

Greenhouse gas 

Independent Electricity System Operator 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

Local Emissions for Net-Zero Modelling Suite - Toronto 

NATEM 

The North American TIMES Energy Model 

NZS 

OPT 

PV 

SILVER 

SILVER-TO 

TEMOA 

Net Zero Strategy 

Optimal net zero scenario 

Photovoltaic panel 

Strategic Integration of Large-capacity Variable Energy Resources 

Strategic Integration of Large-capacity Variable Energy Resources - Toronto 

Tools for Energy Model Optimization and Analysis  

TEMOA-TO 

Tools for Energy Model Optimization and Analysis - Toronto 

vii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Glossary 

TERM 

DEFINITION 

Capacity 
expansion model 

Model that is used for long-term planning in the GHG emitting system. This model 
allows to identify least-cost solutions in terms of future investments in energy and 
waste  system  given  multiple  factors  such  as  demand  projections,  technology 
performance and costs, fuel prices and new policies. 

e.g., Tools for Energy Model Optimization and Analysis – Toronto (TEMOA-TO) 

Deep retrofit 

Deep  retrofit  refers  to  various  measures  that  are  mainly  focused  on  the 
improvements of building envelops which achieve 75 per cent of thermal energy 
gain (energy savings from heating or cooling) and 15 per cent of electricity gain in 
residential, commercial, or institutional buildings. 

Electrification of 
end-use energy 

The electrification of end-use energy refers to the transition from using traditional 
fossil fuels for various end-use applications, such as transportation, heating, and 
cooling,  to  using  electricity  as  the  primary  energy  source.  The  goal  of 
electrification  of  end-use  energy  is  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions  and 
increase energy efficiency. 

Energy mix 

Combination of energy sources that a country or a region uses to meet its energy 
needs. 

Energy poverty 

Energy burden defined as the percentage of household income spent on energy 
(electricity, natural gas, central heating etc.). 

Energy service 

Term used in energy modeling to refer to the service that is provided by energy 
(typically through the technologies), which is separated from the energy itself. For 
example, people want to travel from one place to another. They use energy (e.g., 
gasoline)  for  this  service  but  the  demand  is  for  the  service  itself  rather  than  a 
particular fuel. Thus, gasoline use can be replaced by electricity or physical activity 
to meet the same service (travel). 

Equity (energy) 

Evaluates the accessibility and affordability of energy within the city. 

Greenhouse gas 

Gases that trap heat in the Earth's atmosphere and contribute to the greenhouse 
effect. These gases are naturally present in the atmosphere but human activities, 
especially  fossil  fuel  combustion  and  deforestation,  are  significantly  increasing 
their concentration (anthropogenic greenhouse gases). 

LENZ Modelling 
Suite – Toronto 
(LENZ) 

A suite that comprises more than one model interacting via internal or external 
links  (i.e.,  requiring  the  intervention  of  the  user).  The  LENZ  Modelling  Suite  – 
Toronto is referred to as LENZ all through this document. 

e.g., TEMOA-TO + the Linking Tool + SILVER-TO 

viii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

TERM 

DEFINITION 

The Linking tool 

A tool that ensures communication between the two or more models to maximize 
their complementarity and to reinforce the value for decision-makers. 

Load ramp 

Net load 

e.g., the Linking Tool for passing TEMOA-TO output to SILVER-TO 

Load ramp provides an indication about the speed of electricity load change. Load 
ramp-down,  referring  to  the  speed  of  load  decrease  (MW/h),  is  typically 
associated with the load decrease from the morning peak to the intra-peak load 
level  (around  midday  for  current  load  profile).  Load  ramp-up,  referring  to  the 
speed of load increase (MW/h), is typically associated with the load increase from 
the intra-peak load level to the evening peak. 

Net load of the city refers to the difference between the total electricity demand, 
and the distributed electricity generation connected at the distribution grid level, 
and  must  be  supplied  by  the  transmission  system.  A  particular  case  of  a  PV 
generation effect on electricity demand is the net load reshaped as a duck belly 
(so-called duck curve effect). 

Net zero 

Equilibrium  where  the  quantity  of  greenhouse  gases  emitted  is  offset  by  the 
amount that is removed from the atmosphere and stored. 

Optimal power 
flow  

Optimal power flow represents the non-linear problem of determining the best 
operating  levels  for  electric  power  plants  to  meet  demand  given  throughout  a 
transmission network by minimizing total operating cost. 

Optimal dispatch  Optimal  dispatch  is  the  optimal  allocation  of  individual  generating  units  (units’ 
commitment)  to  produce  electric  power  at  the  lowest  cost  to  reliably  serve 
consumers,  recognizing  any  operational  limit  of  generation  and  transmission 
facilities. 

Optimality 

Optimization 
model 

Peak load 

System  configuration  or  net  zero  pathway  which  represented  the  lowest  (or 
minimum) cost solution for satisfying service demands under various constraints. 

Computational framework used to identify the optimal solution among a set of 
possible alternatives, subject to constraints and objectives, in order to maximize 
or minimize a specific outcome. 

Peak load is the highest amount of electric power that consumers (here the city) 
draw from the grid in a set period of time (here one hour). 

ix 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

TERM 

DEFINITION 

Production cost 
model 

A model that is used for short-term planning in the electricity sector. These models 
allow to identify least-cost solutions in terms of electricity produced by different 
generation units and electricity production costs of a given power system, given 
multiple  factors  such  as  temporal  and  geographic  load  distribution,  generating 
unit locations, and transmission constraints. They simulate unit commitments and 
optimal dispatch. 

e.g., Strategic Integration of Large-capacity Variable Energy Resources – Toronto 
(SILVER-TO) 

Renewable energy  Energy source that is naturally replenished and can be used repeatedly without 

the depletion of resources (also called clean energy). 

Resilience 
(energy) 

The ability to avoid, prepare for, minimize, adapt to, and recover from anticipated 
and  unanticipated  energy  disruptions  in  order  to  ensure  energy  availability 
sufficient to cover demand. 

Simulation model 

Computational  representation  of  a  real-world  system  or  process  used  to 
understand  and  explore  its  potential  behaviour  under  different  scenarios  or 
conditions. 

Unit commitment   Unit  commitment  is  the  process  of  selecting  the  units  from  the  available 

generators to meet the power demand. 

List of scenarios 

ACRONYM 

DEFINITION 

MODELLED WITH 

DON 

Do-nothing 

BAP-TTO 

Business-as-planned 

NZ40-OPT 

Net Zero by 2040 – Optimal  

NZ40-TTO 

Net Zero by 2040 – TransformTO 

NZ50-OPT 

Net Zero by 2050 – Optimal 

NZ50-TTO 

Net Zero by 2050 – TransformTO 

BAP 

NZ40 

NZ50 

Business-as-planned 

Net Zero by 2040 

Net Zero by 2050 

LENZ 

LENZ 

LENZ 

LENZ 

LENZ 

LENZ 

CityInsight 

CityInsight 

CityInsight 

x 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to use this document? 

The present “Local Emissions for Net Zero (LENZ) Modelling Suite – Toronto” or LENZ as it is referred to in 
this document, is a powerful and efficient suite of tools that aims to support the City to actively test the 
implementation options of the net zero transition pathway and refine climate policies and programs as 
needed with cost optimality considerations, as well as investigate the operational aspect of the electricity 
grid. 

This document is a general presentation of LENZ and its capabilities, specifically designed for non-technical 
modellers  or  users.  It  outlines  the  added  value  and  advantages  of  LENZ  by  answering  the  following 
questions. 

  Section 1:  

What is LENZ, what are its principal components, and what makes it special? 

  Section 2:  How can LENZ be used to model different scenarios and what is the scope of 

each of its components? 

  Section 3:  What are typical use cases of LENZ, and what kind of insights can it provide? 

This  is  a  non-technical  documentation  intended  for  decision  makers or anyone  with  limited  modelling 
background.  As  a  stand-alone  document,  it  encompasses  all  the  fundamental  knowledge  needed  to 
understand and interpret the results of LENZ and how it differs from the previous modelling approach. A 
video tutorial,  also  designed  for non-technical users,  is available  and  aligns with  this document. Three 
other resource materials are also available as support materials to take a deeper dive into description of 
the three models and their main functionalities, as well as instructions on how to use them for scenario 
analysis. The first is a Case Study conducted on the five critical steps of the TransformTO NZS is the focus 
of a separate report and includes more extensive analysis of the results of LENZ. The other two resources 
the user can also refer to are the technical documentation1 complemented by the suite of technical video 
tutorials for more in-depth information on the construction and the functionality of LENZ. 

1 ESMIA Consultants (2023). Local Emissions for Net Zero Modelling Suite – Toronto: Technical Documentation. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

SECTION 1 

1. Introduction to Local 
Emissions for Net Zero 

Photo by Maarten van den Heuvel Pexels 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

With proper understanding of the climate crisis, City Council’s 2019 declaration of a climate emergency2 
shifts Toronto’s focus to align its actions with the challenges of this crisis. In committing to the fight against 
climate change, the City has set a consistent target of reducing its emissions in line with Intergovernmental 
Panel  on  Climate  Change’s  (IPCC)  recommended  pathway  to  meet  net  zero  greenhouse  gases  (GHG) 
emissions by 2050 or sooner. To meet this ambitious target, one of the keys for the City is to provide itself 
with powerful and efficient tools such as the present LENZ. The reason LENZ was developed is presented 
through section 1.1. The main components and originality of the tool are explained in section 1.2, and 
section 1.3 ends with LENZ’s modelling features and limitations.  

1.1.  What is the purpose of LENZ? 

In December 2021, the City of Toronto adopted its TransformTO Net-zero Strategy (NZS) 3 that aims to 
outline a pathway to reach net zero GHG emissions by 2040. The Technical Report4 of the NZS contained 
the analysis of the technical, financial, and social/behavioural feasibility of the proposed climate actions. 
In this context, four main scenarios had been developed using the CityInsight5 simulation model to identify 
priorities in terms of climate actions: “Do-Nothing”, Business as Planned (BAP), Net Zero by 2050 (NZ50) 
pathway, and Net Zero 2040 (NZ40) pathway. 

However, the NZS study did not provide the City with in-house modelling tools that could be used on a 
continuous  basis  to  refine  priorities  as  new  information  becomes  available  and  underlying  conditions 
change. The study considered long-term strategies at the scale of years but did not address operational 
challenges that can occur when analyzing energy systems at a higher time resolution such as days or hours. 
Some of these challenges that can occur are the inability of distributed energy resources to meet peak 
load demands, the load in transmission lines exceeding a threshold, and excessive load ramp up or down. 
Finally, the modelling exercise in the NZS was done using a proprietary model that is not easily accessible.  

In this context, a subsequent project led to the development of LENZ based exclusively on open-source 
tools and code using Python language for greater transparency. Leading by example, the City can use LENZ 
to discussion with decision makers to contribute to the definition of net zero GHG and policies, and for 
the  public  to  develop  a  sense  of  engagement.  LENZ  aims  to  support  the  City  to  actively  test  the 
implementation options of the net zero transition pathway and refine climate policies and programs as 
needed with cost optimality considerations, as well as investigate the operational aspect of the electricity 
grid. The model would also come with documentation in the form of manuals and videos. 

2 City of Toronto (2019). MM10.3 - Declaring a Climate Emergency and Accelerating Toronto’s Climate Action Plan - 
by Mayor John Tory, seconded by Councillor Mike Layton. 
3 City of Toronto (2021). TransformTO Net Zero Strategy: A climate action pathway to 2030 and betond. p.8. 
4 City of Toronto (2021). TransformTO Net Zero Strategy Technical Report. 
5 SSG - Sustainable Solutions Group (2023). Tools: CityInsight.  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

1.2.  What is LENZ made up of? 

The project undertaken aimed at developing a suite of open-source energy and waste system and GHG 
emissions models to support TransformTO NZS implementation for the City. LENZ operates on two stand-
alone models connected through the Linking Tool (Figure 1): 

  A long-term capacity expansion model of the energy and waste management system from 2016 
to 2050, defining pathways to reach the GHG commitments comparable to TransformTO NZS; and 
  A short-term electricity production cost model, assuring hourly balance between power supply 
and  demand  and  identifying  where  Toronto’s  electrical  grid  may  face  excessive  load  and  load 
ramp, and understand what future upgrades might be required.  

The long-term component of LENZ is based on the open-source platform named Tools for Energy Model 
Optimization and Analysis6 (TEMOA), and the model developed is referred to as TEMOA-Toronto (TEMOA-
TO).  Similarly,  the  short-term  component  is  based  on  the  open-source  platform  named  Strategic 
Integration of Large-capacity Variable Energy Resources7 (SILVER) and the model developed is referred to 
as SILVER-Toronto (SILVER-TO). The two models are linked with the third component of LENZ, the Linking 
Tool. A complete overview of the three components of LENZ is provided in this document (see sections 
2.2 and 2.3).  

6 TEMOA (2020). TEMOA Cloud. NC State University. 
7 SESIT Group (2022). SILVER. 

Photo by Andre Furtado from Pexels  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Figure 1. Illustration of the components of LENZ 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Long-term  energy  and  waste  system  and  GHG  planning  models  excel  at  tracking  changes  in  installed 
technology8 – for example, purchases of new technology as the economy expands, the old technology 
retires, or new manufacturing needs emerge. These models (also known as capacity expansion models) 
typically  cover  the  time  of  investment  planning  cycles,  several  decades  for  energy  and  waste  system 
investment (such as 2016-2050 for this project). Therefore, long-term planning models, such as TEMOA-
TO, are perfect for the development of net zero transition plans. By using this model, the decision-maker 
will be able to address questions like: 

  How should the energy mix evolve and what type of energy must increase or decrease? 

  What type of technology should be added or retired and with what capacity? 

  When should investments be made? 

TEMOA-TO tracks changes to the GHG emitting sectors by identifying the least-cost mix of energy and 
waste  system  resources  (technologies  and  fuels)  to  meet  a  projected  energy  demand,  taking  into 
consideration  new  policies,  technological 
advancement,  changing  fuel  prices  and 
carbon  emission  constraints.  To  do  this, 
TEMOA-TO  identifies  and  imports  the  total 
energy  production  required  to  address 
energy  demands  in  Toronto.  The  model  is 
built  annually;  however,  it  would  require 
tremendous  calculation  power  to  solved  it 
annually from 2016 to 2050 in a realistic time. 
By default, the resolution9 used is a one-year 
basis  from  2016  to  2025,  and  five-years 
increment until 2050, which provides a good 
balance  between  solving  time  and  period 

Photo by Nicholas C from Pexels  

resolution. 

8 Technology is the generic term for any equipment used in the energy system. The stock of technologies evolve over 
the model’s timing horizon as equipment is purchased and/or retired and as the economy changes with evolving 
needs for goods and services. 

9  The  resolution  is  the  interval  of  time  between  each  calculation  in  a  model.  Further  details  are  provided  in  the 
technical documentation. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

The downside of long-term energy and waste system and GHG planning models are not able to capture 
the full spectrum of the operation decisions that happen within one year. This disadvantage is a particular 
challenge for modelling the electric sector. The solution identified by TEMOA-TO, which is based on the 
total power generation over a year, may be not ideal for short-term operations (e.g., at hourly, daily basis). 
A  common  example  is  in  the  case  of  renewable  energy  generators,  such  as  photovoltaic  panels  (PV), 
operating under net metering10 can increase the load ramp-up and ramp-down on the grid, which requires 
additional investment to balance the variations and protect the grid equipment. 

To  address  these  issues,  LENZ  includes  the  short-term  planning  model  SILVER-TO,  developed  for 
evaluating the impact of high variable renewable penetration on electricity grids. The model takes the 
electricity system configuration of Toronto, including power demand and generator centers, as well as 
transmission and distribution infrastructure, renewable generation, and demand profiles, and identifies 
the least-cost balancing strategy, as well as infrastructure risks and weak points. SILVER-TO uses hourly 
resolution  for  solving  optimal  power  flow  problem  to  optimize  power  generation  unit  commitment 
(optimal  power  dispatch)  under  various  constraints,  such  as  generator  minimum  output,  transmission 
stability and voltage constraints. SILVER-TO is structured to address power production and consumption 
balancing,  reliability  of  power  grid  and  potential  stress  on  the  existing  power  grid,  that  may  become 
vulnerable to blackouts. 

Optimal power flow models such as SILVER-TO are also limited by the extent of their operational planning 
horizon due to the same computational limits as those of long-term planning models. Power flow models 
address this limit by typically covering shorter periods, such as a one-year period. By using this model, the 
decision-maker will be able to address questions like: 

  When/how should power generators operate the equipment to meet power demand? 

  What is the role of electric storage and what are optimal charging/discharging strategies? 

  Will the transmission grid be able to ensure a resilient supply of electric power to address 

future demand under increasing demand peaks? 

10 Net metering is a billing mechanism that allows residential and commercial customers who generate their own 
electricity from solar power or other renewable sources to send excess electricity back to the grid and receive credits 
on their utility bills. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

The  Linking  Tool  is  used  to  exchange  data  between  TEMOA-  TO  and  SILVER-TO,  allowing  the  user  to 
generate  SILVER-TO  inputs  from  TEMOA-TO  results.  In  this  way,  a  yearly  capacity  expansion  plan  for 
Toronto can be broken down and assigned to power infrastructure nodes depending on real constraints. 
For the inputs to TEMOA-TO from SILVER-TO, the Linking Tool transforms possible operational risks into 
recommendations that the decision-maker may use for the consequent run of TEMOA-TO. Linking both 
models is the key to identifying the least-cost pathway for GHG emitting sectors evolution in Toronto that 
is also operationally reliable and less costly. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

1.3. What are the key features and limitations of LENZ? 

Many types of models exist that study the interactions between GHG emitting sectors and their impacts 
on the environment and the economy (referred to as 3E models (Energy-Environment-Economy). While 
historically 3E models were classified into two broad categories, most models today are hybrids and stand 
in between these two extremes:  

  Bottom-up models use a techno-economic approach and include a very detailed description of 
energy systems, with supply-demand technologies and energy flows. They are typically used to 
study long-term evolution of energy systems, technology innovations, and GHG mitigation options 
and costs.  

  Top-down models use a macro-economic approach and include a complete representation of the 
economy  and  monetary  flows.  They  are  typically  used  to  study  macroeconomic  impacts  (jobs, 
GDP, etc.) of energy and climate policies. 

Achieving  ambitious  GHG  reduction  targets,  such  as  net  zero  goals,  necessarily  involves  major 
transformations  of  GHG  emitting  sectors.  Consequently,  bottom-up  models  are  more  appropriate  to 
provide answers to this complex problem. This category can be further split into two main sub categories: 
simulation and optimization. A comparison between the two types is found in Table 1.  

Table 1. Difference between simulation and optimization models 

Type of model 

Simulation 

Optimization 

Example of 
applications 

Aim at 

CityInsight (Used in the NZS) 

LENZ 

Assess  impacts  of  changes/policies 
on GHG emitting sectors 

Provide  optimal  GHG  emitting  sectors 
configuration (cost, energy, GHG) 

Decision making 

Biased,  external  decision  provided 
by the user 

Least biased, internally optimized by the 
model 

Best suited for  

Business as usual scenarios 
Specific policy scenarios 

Energy transition scenarios 
Deep GHG mitigation scenarios  

Policy types that can 
be modelled 

Behavioral change 
Planned technology shift  
Energy switch 

Behavioral change 
Planned technology shift  
Energy switch 
Financial incentive 
Carbon Tax 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Optimization  models  of  3E  systems  provide  a  rigorous 
analytical basis for studying net zero transitions in a detailed 
multi-sector and multi-fuel framework.  

  Optimization  models 

provide 

detailed 
representation  of  the  technological  changes  required  in 
the  long-term,  as  well  as  their  costs,  to  meet  growing 
demands and/or to reach specific goals. 

very 

a 

 

In  addition,  they  provide  advanced 
features  that 
simulation  models  lack.  Specifically,  they  optimize  the 
system  configuration  to  meet  the  total  demand  at  the 
lowest  cost.  They  consider  system  constraints  such  as 
resource 
limits,  renewable  targets,  GHG  taxes  or 
mitigation targets, and energy policies. The optimization 
feature  in  models  comes  at  a  computational  cost  as  it 
typically takes longer to run an optimization model than a 
simulation model. 

The  TEMOA  platform  used  to  build  TEMOA-TO  is  gaining  in 
popularity,  as  one  of  the  most  advanced  open-source 
platforms; it has been used in several projects in Canada and 
the United States such as the study on US Energy-related GHG 
emissions  in  absence  of  federal  climate  policy11,  or  on  the 
symbiotic  relationship  of  solar  power  and  energy  storage  in 
providing capacity value12. It has a rigorous methodology, well 
documented  and 
through  a 
collaborative network of modellers. The optimization feature 
is an advantage over the previous simulation model CityInsight 
used to develop the NZS. 

is  constantly 

improved 

Photo by Cheryl Prince from Pexels  

11 H. Eshraghi A. R. de Queiroz J. F. DeCarolis (2018). US Energy-Related Greenhouse Gas Emissions in the Absence 
of Federal Climate Policy. Environmental Science & Technology, 52(17): 9595-604. 
12 D. Sodano J. F. DeCarolis A. R. de Queiroz J. X. Johnson (2021).  The Symbiotic Relationship of Solar Power and 
Energy Storage in Providing Capacity Value. Renewable Energy, 177: 823-832. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

LENZ CAN: 

  Reproduce historical GHG emissions and provide future projections; 
  Provide three types of computation modes to assess scenarios: 

o  based on policies,  
o  based on GHG targets, or  
o  based on policies and GHG targets; 

  Provide a least-cost investment roadmap following the City’s NZS; 
  Assist in the design of new policies and assess their impacts on energy mix, GHG emissions and 

cost; 

  Assess  energy  security  and  resilience  of  the  City’s  NZS  against  energy  market  disruptions 

(shocks on energy prices, shocks on energy availability); 
 
Identify the sectors and end-uses with the lowest and highest GHG emission abatement cost; 
  Explore  diverse  scenarios  that  represent  a  range  of  possible  futures,  including  system 
transformations in energy use and GHG emitting sectors (building, transportation, and waste); 
  Annually verify the City's trajectory towards net zero emissions, audit the impact of existing 

policies and correct them to reach the target; 

  Evaluate the implications of decarbonization pathways on hourly power demands and hourly 

net power demand in each transformer zone; 

  Evaluate  benefits  and  risks  of  different  decarbonization  pathways  (i.e.,  transition  cost  to 

society, emission reduction potentials, risks in relation with power supply); 

  Provide  a  decision-support  tool  (to  be  run  together  or  separately)  to  the  user  with  the 
possibility to customize and test various inputs (e.g., policies, technology characteristics and 
various assumptions). 

LENZ CANNOT: 

  Capture impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on GHG emissions (but could capture impacts of 

defined similar extreme events); 

  Account for some GHG emissions such as biogenic carbon, carbon embodied in material, non-
organic waste recycling, and land use change (however, the tool reports GHGs as per the GHG 
Protocol for Cities); 

  Evaluate GHG emissions based on consumption of imported goods. The methodology focuses 
on  geographic  boundaries  (sector-based  GHG  emissions  inventory)  and  mainly  considers 
emissions generated within the limits of Toronto; 

  Assess  the  physical  impacts  of  climate  change  and  corresponding  adaptation  measures 
(however,  this  report  provides  the  analysis of  mitigation  actions  that  may  help  to  enhance 
resilience); 

  Capture detailed macroeconomic impacts such as the impact on GDP or employment; 
  Evaluate the perspective of specific stakeholders, like households or investors, when assessing 
individual actions. This would involve applying varying discount rates based on which entity is 
making the investment. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 2 

2. How can LENZ be used? 

Photo by Lisa Simpson from Pexels  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

This section begins with the first part discussing the various scenarios that can be modelled using LENZ, 
followed by an overview of LENZ's individual models in the second and third part. 

2.1.  What types of scenarios can be modelled?  

The types of scenarios that can be modelled with LENZ can be classified into three categories, namely: 
policy based, target based and hybrid scenarios (Figure 2).  

Policy-based scenarios include planned policies but exclude explicit GHG emission goals such as net zero 
targets. While policy-based scenarios have a great value to analyse the impacts of planned policies on GHG 
emission reductions, there is no guarantee a priori that these policies will meet the net zero target.  

Target-based scenarios, contrary to policy-based scenarios, exclude planned policies, but include explicit 
GHG emission goals such as net zero targets. In these scenarios, also called pure optimal scenarios, the 
model generates cost-optimal pathways to reach GHG emissions targets without being constrained by any 
other sector policies or goals. By default, they guarantee that the GHG emissions target is met, and their 
results can be used a posteriori to define the most cost optimal policies required to get there.  

Hybrid  scenarios,  include  both  planned  policies  and  GHG  emission  goals,  such as  net  zero target. The 
planned policies will bring some GHG emission reductions while the GHG targets will guarantee that the 
solutions  meet  the  net  zero  target.  In  these  scenarios,  the  model  generates cost-optimal  pathways  to 
reach net zero targets while being constrained by other sector policies or goals. By definition, there is less 
room for optimization in these scenarios and the solutions are likely to be more costly than with the target-
based scenarios. 

Figure 2. Type of scenarios modelled using LENZ 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

LENZ has been developed with six native scenarios based on the four scenarios as in the TransformTO NZS 
to provide insightful recommendations in terms of cost optimality and robustness of policies. In addition, 
the six different scenarios that are found in LENZ are: 

1.  DON: A Do-Nothing scenario to compare and make sure the GHG projections were aligned with 
the  Do-Nothing  scenario  of  the  TransformTO  NZS  (labeled  BAU  in  the  NZS).  This  scenario 
represents what would happen if the current energy and waste system is preserved until 2050. 
2.  BAP-TTO: A Business-as-planned scenario to assess the impact of the TransformTO NZS policies 
on GHG emissions (policy-based scenario). It is useful to assess the impact of the current policies 
on  GHG  emissions  combined  with  the  natural  evolution  of  the  system  resulting  from  market 
competition between technologies and energy costs.  

3.  NZ50-TTO: A hybrid scenario, representing how the City may achieve net zero GHG by 2050 while 

considering the policies and targets of the TransformTO NZS. 

4.  NZ50-OPT:  A target  based  or  pure-optimal scenario, representing the  cost-optimal  pathway to 

reach net zero GHG by 2050. 

5.  NZ40-TTO: A hybrid scenario, representing how the City may achieve net zero GHG by 2040 while 

considering the policies and targets of the TransformTO NZS. 

6.  NZ40-OPT:  A target  based or pure-optimal  scenario,  representing  the  cost-optimal  pathway to 

reach net zero GHG by 2040. 

As explained earlier in this section, LENZ will generate cost optimal pathways for both types of net zero 
scenarios.  However,  the  hybrid  scenario  (TTO)  has  policies  imposed  on  it  which  translate  into  more 
constraints  than  the  target-based  scenario  (OPT)  and  as  result,  the  TTO  scenario  has  less  flexibility  to 
explore cost optimal solutions. This will result in the TTO scenario having a less economical solution than 
the OPT scenario as illustrated in Figure 3.  

Figure 3. Schematic cost-optimality representation of LENZ and TransformTO NZS scenarios 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

2.2. 

TEMOA-TO, a long-term planning model 

TEMOA-TO  is  a  capacity  expansion  model  for  long-term  planning  of  energy,  waste  and  GHG  emitting 
systems based on the TEMOA open-source platform which is written using Python programming language. 
TEMOA-TO can  be  used  to  model  policies included  in  the  NZS and  identify  least-cost configurations  of 
energy and waste systems under different socio-economic conditions. This section first outlines the scope 
and assumptions of TEMOA-TO, providing a comprehensive understanding of its structure and underlying 
construction principles. Subsequently, it presents examples of results obtained with TEMOA-TO. 

2.2.1. Scope & assumptions 

TEMOA-TO projects the evolution of energy and waste systems, as well as GHG emissions at either annual 
level  or  with  5-years  increment,  on  a  long-term  horizon  (2016-2050)  for  the  City  of  Toronto.  The 
subsections below describes the definition of the energy and waste system modeled and the methodology 
applied to build it. 

Scope of the model 

TEMOA-TO  focuses  on  long-term  planning  of  the  GHG  emitting  sectors  (buildings,  transportation,  and 
waste)  of  the  city.  These  sectors  align  with  the  GHG  Protocol  for  Cities  (GPC)13,  and  the  sector-based 
emissions  inventory  the  City  reports  annually.  Additionally,  as  local  generation  is  expected  to  grow,  it 
includes a module representing the energy sector, both distributed energy resources and energy imports. 
Figure 4 shows how the modelling scope relates to the sector-based GHG inventory from the City14. 

Figure 4. Modelling scope related to GHG emitting sectors 

13 Green House Gas Protocol for Cities https://ghgprotocol.org/ghg-protocol-cities 
14 City of Toronto (2022). 2020 Sector-Based Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Photo by Jude Joshua from Pixabay  

Reaching GHG net zero target requires a drastic change in both energy supply and demand. Increase of 
low-carbon transportation options, expansion of local renewable energy and storage, significant reduction 
of natural gas use, and building performance targets are the four key drivers for the deep decarbonization 
of the Toronto’s economy.  

TEMOA-TO is used to model the NZS policies and targets. It is calibrated with the energy figures reported 
in CityInsight and with data provided by the City. The model is finely calibrated by energy type and sector 
for  the  base  year  with  a  maximum  four  per  cent  difference  in  energy  consumption  and  five  per  cent 
difference in GHG emissions (please refer to the technical documentation15 for more information on the 
benchmarking process).  

Building a comprehensive database 

The development of  a system model  like TEMOA-TO involves  first  the  development of  comprehensive 
databases  from  a large  amount  and variety of  specific data  sources. This is a very  important task  that 
requires  to  be  performed  meticulously.  Figure  5  describes  the  approach  used  to  build  the  TEMOA-TO 
databases. 

15 ESMIA Consultants (2023). Local Emissions for Net Zero Modelling Suite – Toronto: Technical Documentation. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Figure 5. Steps to build a comprehensive database for TEMOA-TO 

Raw data are collected from multiple sources (see Table 2) 

Step 1: 
Compile 





City-owned datasets and SSG-owned processed datasets from the CityInsight model 
were used as the starting point.  
Those datasets were enhanced with open-source data from annual reports (e.g., Via 
Rail,  Ports  Toronto,  TTC),  other  modelling  initiatives  (e.g.,  Google  Environmental 
Insights) and private sector data. 

Raw data are formatted, broken down and adapted for the adequate 
representation of the energy, waste and GHG systems of the city of Toronto 

Step 2: 
Format 

Step 3: 
Calibrate 

Step 5: 
Project 

Step 6: 
Constraint 

















For  example,  total  energy  consumption  data  (e.g.,  total  electricity  consumed  in 
residential buildings) are further broken down into multiple end-use demands and 
technologies  (e.g.,  electricity  consumed  by  heat  pumps  to  provide  cooling)  using 
multiple data sources including NATEM and NRCAN datasets.  
For example, Canadian and Ontario specific data are adapted to the Toronto context. 

Data are further refined to replicate the City’s sector-based GHG inventory 

Adjustment to input data and model parameters such as efficiencies are done to be 
able  to  replicate  energy  consumption  and  GHG  figures  available  in  official 
publications such as the GHG Inventory.  

Some data are projected to the 2050 modelling horizon  
and used as input in TEMOA-TO 

Techno-economic parameters such as performance and capital cost are projected for 
a  wide  range  of  new  technologies  available  in  the  model  database  for  future 
investments. These projections are based on an extensive literature review as well as 
from the NATEM model. 
Demands for energy services are projected using macroeconomic drivers specific to 
the city such as population and employment projections. 

User constraints are built in the model to capture resource limitations,  
and/or to model specific targets or policies 

Constraints representing the technical feasibility of technology deployment (e.g., the 
maximum potential deployment for PV panel is 7350 MW in a given region). 
Constraints representing targets and policies from the TransformTO NZS (e.g., a ban 
on natural gas appliances by 2040). 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Table 2. List of data sources used to build the TEMOA-TO model 

Type of data 

Sources 

Existing system per sector 

Calibration data 

New technology 

Demographic projection 

Net zero strategy 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

2.2.2. Results interpretations 

TEMOA-TO  model  can  provide  various  insights  including:  GHG  emissions,  costs  (investment  and 
operational), energy mix supply, and capacity deployment. Figure 6 shows aggregated examples of these 
results. Note that since the model database is broken down at the technology level, higher granular results 
may be obtained. 

Figure 6. Results of the NZ40-TTO scenario of the case study from TEMOA-TO 

(a)  GHG emissions per sector 

(b)  Cumulated investment cost for society 

(c)  Energy supply mix 

(d)  Car & light-truck vehicle kilometers 

travelled 

A general advice for result interpretation is not to consider these results as forecasts or as the most likely 
outcomes, but rather as ideal outcomes to meet a certain target at the minimum cost and under specific 
conditions. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

2.3. 

SILVER-TO & the Linking Tool, a short-term planning model 

SILVER-TO is a production cost model for short-term planning of electricity systems based on the SILVER 
platform (OS) written using Python programming language. SILVER-TO can be used to identify least-cost 
operation strategies for the electricity system and to address power supply and demand balancing under 
variable operation conditions. 

The Linking Tool ensures communication between TEMOA-TO and SILVER-TO models to maximize their 
complementarity  and  to  reinforce  the value  for  decision  makers.  The  Linking  Tool  transforms  possible 
operational  risks  into  recommendations  that  the  decision-maker  may  use  for  the  consequent  run  of 
TEMOA-TO. Like the two other models, the Linking Tool is written using Python programming language. 

The next sub-sections outline the scope and results interpretations of the two models presented above. 

2.3.1. Scope & assumptions 

SILVER-TO focuses on grid-operator scale and is used to evaluate the impact of a Toronto energy transition 
(such  as  electrification  of  end-use  appliances,  deployment  of  renewable  generation  like  PV  and  wind 
turbines etc.) on the transmission power system. It allows unit commitment and power flow calculation 
at an hourly level for critical years between 2016 and 2050. This transmission system supplying Toronto is 
described below. 

The Linking Tool is a Python based tool built especially for LENZ and is used to link TEMOA-TO and SILVER-
TO models. Linking both models is the key to identifying the least-cost pathway for GHG emitting sectors 
evolution in Toronto that is also operationally reliable and less costly. An overview of the methodology 
used in the Linking Tool is provided below. 

The transmission system supplying Toronto 

Power grid is composed of two grid levels that are distinguished mainly by their voltage levels. Electricity 
power is carried from the centralized conventional generators connected to the high voltage transmission 
grid  down  through  the  lower  voltage  transmission  levels  towards  distribution  grids  to  which  most 
consumers  are  connected.  Ontario  transmission  grid,  operated  by  the  Independent  Electricity  System 
Operator  (IESO),  is  composed  on  the  extra-high  voltage  (500  kV),  high  voltage  (230  kV  and  115  kV). 
Distribution low-voltage grid (less than 50 kV) is operated by distribution companies (Toronto Hydro for 
the city). Electricity power generators depending on their capacity may be connected to transmission and 
distribution  grids.  Transmission-connected  generators  are  typically  conventional  generators,  such  as 
nuclear  and  gas plants,  as  well  as  renewable  generators of  large-capacity (e.g., wind  and  solar  farms). 
Distribution-connected  generation,  also  known  as  embedded  generation,  is  small-scale  generation 
located  within  local  distribution  companies’  territories  (e.g.,  rooftop  solar).  Most  consumers  are 
connected to the low-voltage distribution grid. In Toronto, only few large-scale consumers are directly 
connected  to  the  transmission  grid.  Those  large-scale  consumers,  such  as  steel  arc  furnaces,  may  be 
connected to the high-voltage level under contractual agreement. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Figure 7. The regional transmission system supplying Toronto16 

The  Toronto  power  grid  includes  a  gas-fired  power  plant  (Portland  Energy  Center)  connected  at  the 
transmission level at Hearn switching station (Figure 7). This power plant is managed by IESO17 within the 
Ontario generation portfolio to address provincial electricity power demand. Electric power generators 
connected  to  the  transmission  grid  are  large-scale  generators,  such  as  nuclear  plants  operated  by  the 
Ontario Power Generation (OPG) or renewable generators (including hydro power plants) operated by the 
Brookfield Renewable Partners. The amount and the schedule of power generation produced by these 
plants are defined via the electricity market where the electricity is sold by suppliers (i.e., generators) to 
distributors (that sell the electricity to end-use consumers). IESO predicts Ontario electric power demand 
24-hour in advance and receives bids from generators indicating the amount the amount of electricity 
they can  produce  and  at what  price.  The IESO  reviews  and  accepts bids, starting  from  the  lowest-cost 
options, until enough energy is secured to meet Ontario’s demand18. Therefore, the amount of electricity 
at  each  time  step  (e.g.,  hour)  produced  by  transmission-connected  generators  will  be  defined  by  the 
electricity  demand  of  the  entire  province,  as  well  as  export  commitments  (if  any).  Toronto  Hydro  will 
purchase the electricity from the market to cover the city electricity demand from the grid. 

16 IESO - Independent Electricity System Operator (2019). Toronto Region: Integrated Regional Resource Plan. 
17 More details on Transmission-Connected Generation at https://www.ieso.ca/en/Power-Data/Supply-
Overview/Transmission-Connected-Generation  
18 More details on the IESO electricity pricing at https://www.ieso.ca/en/Learn/Electricity-Pricing-Explained/The-
Value-of-Electricity-Markets  

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Scope of SILVER-TO and the Linking Tool 

In SILVER-TO, the city is mainly supplied through power imports from the province at different 230 kV 
transmission  stations,  and  from  the  Portland  Energy  Center  gas-fired  power  plant  at  Hearn  switching 
station. The electricity generated by renewables sources or battery discharging are considered consumed 
locally (at distribution level) and do not feed into the grid19. With SILVER-TO, the power system operation 
cost  is  optimized  by  minimizing  power  generation  costs  subject  to  meeting  electricity  demands  and 
reliability requirements. The SILVER-TO model utilizes data from various sources, including the TEMOA-
TO  model,  which  provides  outputs  at  the  city  level.  However,  the  data  must  be  broken  down  to  the 
transmission level and at hourly resolution to be useful for SILVER-TO inputs. To accomplish this, various 
methods are used, such as population rates by areas or power generation potential. 

The Linking Tool is an essential component to break down the data from TEMOA-TO for SILVER-TO, which 
is responsible for projecting geographically and hourly the total net load that must be met by the power 
grid.  This  projection  considers  several  factors  such  as  load  profile,  generation  capacity,  residential 
batteries, electric vehicles use, and grid constraints. By analyzing these factors, the Linking Tool ensures 
that the power grid can provide reliable and sufficient energy to meet the demand at any given time. 

WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN LOAD PROFILE AND TOTAL NET LOAD? 

- 

The  load  profile  is  a  representation  of  the  variation  in  electrical  power  demand  over  a 
specific  period.  The  shape  of  load  profile  in  a transmission  zone  depends on the  type  of 
consumers  and  their  consumption  habits.  The  shape  of  load  profile  in  a  city  where  the 
majority of power consumers are households and small businesses will be different from the 
load profile shape of a large jurisdiction (e.g., a province or a country). Typically, provincial 
and  country load  profiles will  be  impacted  by the  large-scale consumers  (e.g., industries) 
whose power demand will be more constant throughout the entire day. As a consequence, 
the shape of the provincial or country profile will be “flatter” than the shape of the load 
profile in the city. In 2020, Toronto Hydro distribution company supplied 697,000 residential 
consumers, 83,000 commercial consumers and 44 large-scale users. 

Electric power consumers by category in Toronto 

0.2%

56%

43%

Residential

Commercial

Industrial

- 

The total net load refers to the actual power demand that must be met by the power grid 
after accounting for factors such as load profile, generation capacity, residential batteries 
and electric vehicles use, and grid constraints. 

19 Although SILVER-TO gives the possibility of integrating centralized renewable generation (as well as storage) at a 
grid, we observe that in reality there is not enough space in Toronto to deploy such high-capacity generators that 
would be directly connected to the transmission grid. Please refer to the technical documentation for further details. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

In more concrete terms, part of the data used for the SILVER-TO model comes from the TEMOA-TO model, 
and the Linking Tool ensures the data conversion and transfer. The outputs of TEMOA-TO, reported at the 
city level for a season or a year, must be broken down spatially by transformer zone, and temporally by 
hour  for  SILVER-TO.  Spatial  break  down  is  done  based  on  the  load  in  different  transmission  nodes. 
Temporal  break  down  to  generate  representative  patterns  for  energy  consumption  and  production 
patterns is done using a dedicated approach for each type of TEMOA-TO data (e.g., load profile, PV, electric 
vehicles (EV) etc.) (see Figure 8 for an example of load profile break down). The final goal is to estimate a 
total net load at the level of each transformer zone in Toronto for a selected year. The total net load is 
defined as the electricity demand plus electricity used to charge batteries and EV, minus generation from 
variable renewable generation. 

Figure 8. Example of load profile break down done by the Linking Tool for a winter day 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

2.3.2. Results interpretations 

The total  net  load calculated  by the  Linking Tool  will be  strongly  affected  by electrification of  end-use 
energy20,  distributed  generation,  storage,  and  electric vehicles,  creating important  ramp-up  and  ramp-
down  effects  and  accentuating  peaks.  The  Linking  Tool  processed  TEMOA-TO  results  to  provide  the 
different energy transition measures and calculated the total net load. Figure 9 illustrates the impacts of 
the different energy transition measures on the total net load. This total net load is then used as an input 
for SILVER-TO model.  

The ramp-up and ramp-down effects and the accentuation of peaks in net load that needs to be supplied 
by the grid may lead to two major effects: 

 

 

increase of the load level that may require transmission lines to operate at more than 40 per 
cent of their maximum capacities, increasing resistive heating and generating higher energy 
losses; and 

increase  of  load  variation  of  transmission  lines  that  may  result  in  additional  equipment 
stress. 

SILVER-TO  tests  the  operational  viability  of  a  specific  energy  transition  strategy  from  the  power  grid 
operational perspective for a certain time period (e.g., year, season). SILVER-TO model includes an excel-
based dashboard of outputs with overview of key statistics for a user-selected operational time period. 
Those metrics are designed to quickly identify the risks for the transmissions system supplying Toronto. 
For example, the user can choose the threshold leading to the increase of heat losses on the line and the 
dashboard will automatically show a summary of the number of lines at risk.  

20 The electrification of end-use energy refers to the transition from using traditional fossil fuels (e.g., natural gas) 
for  various  end-use  applications, such  as  transportation,  heating,  and  cooling,  to  using  electricity  as  the  primary 
energy  source.  The  goal of  electrification  of  end-use  energy  is  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions  and increase 
energy efficiency. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

Figure 9. How electricity demand profile of the City may be reshaped in the future? 

To be supplied from the grid 

Impact of different energy transition measures 

TODAY 

-

-

Day load is higher 
than night load 
Not well 

End-use electrification 
(gas phase-out): 
- Overall demand increase 

Transport options electrification (EV): 
- Demand increase for transport charging 

at public station and at home 

Increase 

Increase 

Increase of distributed  
PV generation: 
- Demand decreases during 

periods when PV 
generation is available 
(electricity is consumed 
from the local source (PV) 
and not from the grid) 

Decrease 

TOMORROW 

- High demand variability 
- High and well pronounced 

demand peaks 

PEAK 

IMPORTANT 
RAMPS 

Increase of distributed  
wind generation: 
- Demand decrease during 
periods when wind 
generation is available  

Use of battery storage: 
- Discharging batteries during 
high demand periods 

Decrease 

Decrease 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 3 

3. Typical use cases for LENZ 

Photo by Tom Dubois from Pexels 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

This section presents examples do demonstrate some of the use cases of LENZ and is by no means 
exhaustive. The examples are based on the scenarios developed in LENZ and discussed in detail in the 
Case Study. The examples focus on the five critical steps identified in the Net Zero Strategy, as well as 
resilience, energy affordability, employment, and social cost of inaction in the city of Toronto.  

3.1. 

Carbon accountability through carbon budgets 

The  City  will  establish  a  carbon  budget  to  track  climate  actions  against  annual  emission 
limits to drive accountability.  
LENZ  can  provide  insights  on  the  cumulative  costs  of  scenarios  to  identify  cost-effective 
solutions to reach GHG emissions targets. 

Insight from the Case Study as an example: Toronto’s net zero by 2040 pathway is achievable 
with different implementation paths, each with trade-offs (based on TEMOA-TO). 

Figure 10. Cumulated investment costs 

A  comparison  of  the  cumulated  cost  from  the  Case 
Study for example suggests that achieving net zero by 
2040 with the NZ40-OPT scenario may imply 31 per 
cent  less  investment  costs  compared  to  the  NZ40-
TTO scenario (Figure 10).  

The TransformTO NZS is built mostly on ‘safe bets’21, 
defined  as  existing  technologies  that  are  already 
commercially available and face no major constraints 
to widespread implementation which is reflected in 
the polices. Optimal NZ40 includes both ‘safe bets’ as 
well  as  emerging  technologies  with  high  impact. 
While the cost is less in the NZ40-OPT scenario than 
the NZ40-TTO scenario, there is more risk associated 
in  the  first  due to the  uncertainties  inherent to the 
limited confidence in emerging technologies.  

21  “Safe  bets”  are solutions  that  show  up  no  matter  how  Canada's  transition  plays  out.  They  leverage  existing 
technologies  that  face  no  major  barriers  to  scaling.  Canadian  Climate  Institute  (2023).  Online  information. 
https://climateinstitute.ca/safe-bets-and-wild-cards/  

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

3.2. 

Accelerate significant reduction of natural gas 

To achieve the targets, the City of Toronto must limit dependence on natural gas.  
LENZ can provide a forecast of natural gas consumption in the future for different scenarios to assess 
the trade-offs between different policies. 

Insight from the Case Study as an example: Residual natural gas may be required as a resilience 
measure (based on TEMOA-TO). 

Figure 11. Natural consumption in net-zero scenario 

Natural gas phase out may be reasonable for carbon 
emission  reduction  in  Toronto.  Figure  11  shows 
natural  gas  consumption  in  net  zero  scenario,  it 
suggests different level of consumption by 2050. 

As suggested by the NZ40-OPT scenario, the option 
leading to only partial natural gas grid abandonment 
is highly recommended under net zero strategy. The 
use  of  natural  gas  as  a  backup  will  still  result  in  a 
reduction  of  carbon  emissions  in  the  City  while 
contributing to the resilience of energy supply. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

3.3. 

Establish building performance targets 

Toronto will establish emissions performance targets for buildings to reach Net Zero by 2040.  
LENZ can assess different the level of retrofits required in buildings to reduce energy usage and the 
technologies required to replace gas appliances. 

Insight from the Case Study as an example: Upgrade building to high efficiency through deep-
retrofit is not the cost-optimal path (based on TEMOA-TO). 

Figure 12. Retrofitting level in existing buildings 

Figure  12  retrofit  level  refers  to  the  thermal  energy 
gains  in  buildings.  The  scenarios  suggest  different 
level of retrofit for existing buildings.  

75% 

25% 

The  NZ40-TTO  scenario  suggests  deep  retrofits  with 
75 per cent of thermal gains, for all existing buildings 
by 2050. The NZ40-OPT scenario suggests retrofit with 
25 per cent of thermal gains. This gain is aligned with 
a  standard  retrofit,  including  energy  assessment, 
recommissioning, 
insulation 
improvements. The optimal level of retrofit depends 
in fact on various criteria (vintage, archetype, size, and 
use) and would need to be further assessed for each 
building  type.  However,  to  avoid  extra  costs,  the 
target of the TransformTO NZS could be revised to a 
more  flexible  set  of  targets  starting  with  the  most 
cost-effective options. 

priority 

and 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

3.4. 

Increase low carbon transportation options 

In  addition  to  increasing  the  active  and  public  transportation,  Toronto  will  advance  options  to 
incentivize  electric  vehicle  adoption  and  disincentivize  the  use  of  carbon  polluting  gasoline  and 
diesel vehicles.  
LENZ can estimate the level of electrification of vehicles required and the role alternative renewable 
fuels can play in the transition based on different policies. 

Insight from the Case Study as an  example: Complete electrification of conventional  vehicle 
stock is not resilient nor cost-effective (based on TEMOA-TO). 

Figure 13. Car & Light-truck vehicle kilometres travelled 

To  achieve  a  resilient  and  sustainable  transportation 
system,  a  multi-faceted  approach 
is  required  to 
decarbonize transportation, as per Figure 13. 

Behavioral  change  should  be  the  priority.  Encouraging 
people to use alternative transportation, such as public 
transportation (22 per cent of trips by 2040), biking (23 
per cent of trips by 2040), and walking (22 per cent of 
trips by 2040). Finally, for residual vehicle trips especially 
trips  and 
for 
commercial 
trips,  decreasing  GHG 
emissions may include electrifying vehicles (75 per cent 
of  light  vehicles  by  2040  in  NZ40-OPT)  supported  by 
charging station deployment. 

longer  passenger 

transportation 

transportation 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

3.5. 

Increase local renewable energy & storage 

By increasing opportunities for local renewable generation to be located within the City's boundary, 
Toronto will contribute to a decarbonized electricity supply.  
LENZ can determine the capacity of renewable generation sources and electricity storage that needs 
to be deployed. 

Insight from the Case Study as an example: Increased local renewable energy & storage may 
supply a growing electricity demand (based on LENZ). 

Figure 14. Capacity deployment for local energy 

To decrease electricity consumption from the grid, PV 
generation scale-up to 7,000 MW or greater, followed 
by expansion of onsite battery storage capacities that 
is suitable to go beyond 2,000 MW.  

Scaling-up of wind power capacity should be done with 
caution and is estimated to reach 2,000 MW by 2050. 
Wind generation may create pronounced undesirable 
variations not only during the day (such as solar), but 
also  during  the  night.  Wind  power  generators 
deployment  must  be  followed  by  an  additional 
increase  in  battery  storage  and  the  deployment  of 
additional  technologies  for  continuous  balancing  of 
wind generation variability. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

3.6. 

Resilience of electric power supply 

The energy transition in Toronto is marked by the phase-out of conventional fuels (such as natural 
gas), massive electrification of end-uses, and expansion of distributed renewable capacity which will 
result in major changes to electricity generation and demand trends.  
Using LENZ, the risks associated with the shifting trends can be evaluated and different mitigation 
strategy can be tested to design strategies that result in a resilient electric power supply. 

Insight from the Case Study as an example: Net zero pathways create considerable risk for 
resilience of electricity supply after 2030 (based on SILVER-TO). 

Figure 15. Impact on seasonal peak demand supplied from the electricity grid 

Seasonal peak demand may increase over time with 
end-use electrification (Figure 15) 

The  City  may  adopt  different  actions  to  mitigate 
power  demand  peak  increase  by  incentivising  the 
expansion  in  battery  storage  capacity,  incentivising 
particular  user  behaviours  (e.g.,  coordinated  EV 
changing during specific time periods), or reinforcing 
standards for building retrofits. If these measures are 
not  sufficient,  more  advanced  actions  could  be 
considered (e.g., the adoption of seasonal storage at 
the city level and grid upgrades at power grid level). 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

3.7. 

Energy affordability 

Dependence on electricity where rates may be susceptible to increases that would add pressure on 
low-income households and push a larger fraction of the residents into energy poverty.  
LENZ  can  evaluate  the  impact  of  policies  on  financially  vulnerable  residents  and  determine  the 
subsidies and rebates that would provide energy security to residents at risk. 

Insight from the Case Study as an example: 2.5 Million CA$ per year will be required to help 
50,000 low-income households to pay their electricity bills (derived from TEMOA-TO). 

Figure 16. Subsidies to be paid as bill rebates to decrease energy poverty in Toronto 

Figure 16 shows that under net-zero, electricity rates 
are  susceptible  to  increase.  This  may  drive  the 
increase  of  electricity  bills  for  Toronto  consumers, 
likely  creating  the  need  to  support  low-income 
households with bill rebates to mitigate their energy 
poverty22.  The  Case  Study  modelling  indicates  that 
up  to  2.5  Million  CA$  may  be  needed  annually  for 
electricity bill rebates to keep energy poverty in the 
city  under  the  six  per  cent  threshold.  In  addition, 
other  support  actions  will  be  required  to  ensure  a 
just  energy  transition  in  the  city,  such  as  subsidies 
for 
in 
renewable  generation  and  residential  storage,  and 
support for low- and medium-income households to 
implement building retrofit measures. 

low-income  households  for 

investment 

22 Energy burden defined as the percentage of household income spent on energy (electricity, natural gas, central 
heating etc.). 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

3.8. 

Employment 

The  adoption  of  net  zero  strategies  in  different  jurisdictions  will  increase  competition  to  attract 
workers holding key qualifications able to implement and deliver the change needed.  
LENZ  can  assess  the  job  market  requirements  and  estimate  the  size  of  qualified  labor  power 
required to avoid labour shortage that would compromise the set targets. 

Insight from the Case Study as an example: The City may face an important shortage of 
qualified labour after 2030 (derived from TEMOA-TO) 

Figure 17. Net person-year of employment required and the projected annual labour force in Toronto 

Figure 17 compares the pace of net person-years of employment required for net-zero by 2040 scenarios 
with the projected annual labour force increase in Toronto. Negative values indicate that conventional 
jobs elimination outpaces clean jobs creation, which may increase unemployment. 

The adoption of net zero strategies in different jurisdictions will increase competition to attract workers 
holding key qualifications. In net zero by 2040 scenarios, Toronto may require a considerable net person-
year  addition  after  2030.  Attracting  workers  from  other  sectors  and  new  qualified  labour  may  not  be 
sufficient to address the labour needed to implement the net zero strategy. This creates a risk of labour 
shortage.  The  City  will  be  required  to  implement  particular  programs,  such  as  relocation  support  and 
different social benefits, to attract a large enough qualified labour force. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LENZ Modelling Suite - Toronto 

3.9. 

Social cost of inaction 

Social  cost  of  inaction  refers  to  the  economic,  social,  and  environmental  costs  that  are  incurred 
when action is not taken to address a particular issue or problem. It is the cost that society as a 
whole pays when no action is taken to prevent or mitigate negative outcomes.  
LENZ can estimate the cost society will incur under different scenarios and can be used to evaluate 
the  return  on  investment  of  implementing  different  solutions  from  those  scenarios  and  the 
economic gains Toronto can benefit from. 

Insight from the Case Study as an example: Failure to act can result in considerable costs for 
society (derived from TEMOA-TO) 

Figure 18. Cumulative Social cost of carbon 

Social cost of inaction refers to the economic, social, 
and  environmental  costs  that  are  incurred  when 
action  is  not  taken  to  address  a  particular  issue  or 
problem.  It  is  the  cost  that  society  as  a  whole  pays 
when  no  action  is  taken  to  prevent  or  mitigate 
negative  outcomes.  To  measure  the  cost  of  inaction 
for the climate crisis, the social cost of carbon is most 
often used as per Figure 18. 

Under  current  policies,  the  City  is  engaged  on  the 
Business-As-Planned  scenario  GHG  trajectory,  the 
cumulative  cost  of  the  BAP-TTO  scenario  between 
2016 and 2040 may be around 20 Billion (2016) CA$ in 
the  average  case23.  Addressing  the  climate  crisis 
globally by reaching net  zero  by  2040 would  imply a 
significant economic gain for the city of Toronto with 
an  average  estimate  of  6  Billion  (2012)  CA$  in  the 
average case. 

23 A wide range of social cost of carbon are used, the average case represents an average with a 3 per cent Discount 
Rate. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
